hi my name is Athena and in this idea
brain hang train track session I'm going
to be talking about data that the
Internet is a data management and data
publication multi-tool and I will be
spending the next one and a half hours
showing you how it can be used to
version control your next project in all
aspects how it can assist you in the
reproducibility of your results should
you be wondering where I am I'm in a
rabbit hutch should you ask yourself why
the hell is she rabbit hutch and I would
say well why not
given that the condemning elements where
we can currently go and the company that
we can currently have I chose to be in
the most exciting place with the most
Corona confirmed company and have access
to and this is why I'm joined today by
the two cute bunnies in unit Nala you
can see a mere munching a carrot right
next to me this has the great advantage
you have the chance of your bunny
content in addition to amazing data
don't worry I'm not enforcing a software
demonstration on to innocent bunnies
that would be really cruel the door of
this incredibly large enclosures open
and the two can leave whenever they want
as can you by the way so if you want to
leave this train track on mute me go
ahead I won't even notice it's a win-win
situation
so from the middle of Germany in some
rabbit hutch a very friendly hello to
you wherever you may be in I hope that
you stay safe during this pandemic and
that you've made yourself comfortable
and brought a computer with you to this
train track session so let's get started
with data left there are many different
use cases for little eighty-one
straightforward reason that I use it
personally for is to version control all
of my personal projects whether that are
data analyses writing a book such as the
days at hand book
inversion controlling my CV creating
presentations and videos like this one
I'm on managing my muse
I call this straightforward because one
thing that Allah does is version control
version control means tracking changes
made to files all the time and having
the ability to revert changes of your
specific states of a file of a project
system
unlike version control with tools like
git data that can not only manage small
files it is code other text but files of
any size this makes it possible to
version control 500 gigabytes of Anwar
imaging data with data bed for example
I'll manage my complete user gradually
but I have more use cases for at Alette
and so will you
I again use it to create provenance
direct and computationally reproducible
scientific analyses so when I write a
paper then I use data led to link data
code software and the results and then I
publish all of that to get repository
hosting services such as github to make
my work openly and easily accessible to
others and my home institution the
Jewish Research Center reuse data lead
for really large-scale fair data
analysis projects on supercomputing in
construction and the common use cases
for example concern data application Oh
collaborative work on analysis and you
may have even other use cases for it
it's an incredibly versatile tool with
my demonstration today I hope that I can
give you an idea of what's generally
possible and a good starting point to
get going with data that I won't go into
all of the details and I won't be able
to mention everything that is possible
with it toilet but if my demonstration
interested you then there are resources
out there that will get you started with
however you want to use data let first
and foremost those resources are
collected in what is called the data led
handbook you can find it as an HTML
version within a PDF or ePub format at
handbook today to latoque this handbook
is a hands-on crash course on
data that that you can turn to to learn
how to use data it's written in a
community effort and it teaches you
everything you need to know regardless
of the background that you have beyond
occurs like tutorial the handbook also
contains advanced topics such as chapter
on scaling up so if you're interested in
version controlling projects that are as
large as a human connectome project
alotta i'll run analysis on them go
ahead and read this chapter and it also
contains use cases those are step by
step instructions and overviews on the
different use cases that data that
assists with those can be basic like
general introduction to provenance
tracking with data led but they can also
be quite comprehensive for example how
to write a completely reproducible paper
um or how to implement a central data
management and data archive a solution
on an infrastructure level for a
scientific institute if you want to find
out more
this is the handbook at handbook Datanet
or talk or come to poster one nine one
for later
if the OHP m so let's start with the
boring stuff data let is a commandment
and it has a python api so whenever I
use it I either operated in the terminal
using a command that starts with data
let I use it in scripts such as shell
scripts Python scripts to put on
notebooks and so forth in the command
line and this is how it looks like I
always start with a general data like
commanded then I add whatever
sub-command I need and if I use it in
its Python API then this is the line
that I would use to import data that I
think you would like to see a script
where I show you how the system cool
dekha let up on to version control tools
namely get and get annex they both
provide the version control features the
data let others get annex take care of
handling large file content that kid
wouldn't be
to manage in order to use data led you
will need to have all three tools
installed get to get an X and data bed
however you don't need to know how to
use Kate pocket annex it's completely
fine if you have never used git before
data let tries to hide the complexities
of the other tools as best as it
possibly can
you can find details on how to install
data LED and its dependencies on all
operating systems or using several
package managers in the data net
handbook it also details how to install
data that on shared machines such as
high performance compute clusters where
you don't have administrative privileges
so pseudo writes once you have data
light installed we can go right into
this train track if you have data that
already installed but you're not sure
whether it is an old version of data led
please go and check it now it is
important for the stranger accession
that you have a quite recent version of
data that at least version 0.12.10
your terminal if you have an outdated
version of the internet then the
handbook will also show you how to
upgrade to the most recent Tatian lite
version all of that can be found in the
section installation and configuration
that is shown in this nice cool right
after the installation of data led the
very first thing that we have to do if
you haven't done so yet is to configure
your get identity if you've never used
it again don't worry the identity that
we are providing here with the git
config command consists only of your
name and email address and it will be
used to associate a change that you make
of the version control features of data
LED with you as an author so that's a
useful feature to have and if you don't
do the configuration then data LED
one you constantly now that you have
configured to get identity we are ready
to use data let for the next product so
let's dive into the basic concepts and
commands so that you can get an idea of
how it can be used and what it can be
used for if you have it installed right
now then I invite you to hearing this
train track to follow along with me and
use the same commands that I'm using you
can find that into copy and paste into
your terminal at handbook the data later
talk in this demonstration I'm using
content from the basics part of the
handbook this part is a code alone crash
course and it follows a narrative that
takes readers through a fictional
educational class called data led 101 so
for the rest of this demonstration
envision yourself as a student in this
college cars and the examples that I'm
using here that's not really related to
neuroscience but tuned to this College
kurz narrative but it will not be
difficult for you to link your own use
cases to the data that concepts and
commands I will be showing you because
that alert is a completely remain
agnostic talk so the foundation are the
most basic concepts that we have to
start with is the data set everything
that we will use data that for happens
in so called data lab data sets and data
set is the core data structure of data
load but honestly it's nothing fancy and
it is that is just a directory on your
computer that you instruct data led to
minute and absolutely any directory in
your computer can be managed by data let
you can create data sets as empty
directories and then populate them you
can transform existing directories that
already have content into data sets to
version control their contents or you
can install data sets from elsewhere to
obtain the data that they contain and
even though it's not the coolest feature
or does it doesn't sound like the
coolest feature right now data sets can
be nested in each other's way
create a hierarchy of datasets and I
will show you later how this feature is
quite amazing in the narrative of the
handbooks basic part we are students and
in the first lesson in chapter 1 we are
creating a data lab data set to collect
all the class materials of the data at
101 casting - we will follow this
narrative to experience some of the
basics of data that data sets because
it's much easier to just explore the
stuff instead of have it explained to
you um creating a data set is done with
the data like create command this
command only needs a name and it will
subsequently create a new directory
under this name and instruct data let
terminated here this command also has an
additional option V - C text to get out
with the - C option data sets can be
configured in a certain way at the time
of creation you can find out about the
details of the text to get configuration
in the data at handbook but in general
this configuration is a very useful
standard configuration for data sets you
can see I want to execute this Pokemon
that data line informs what it is doing
during the execution at the end of this
command as with any command the data let
performs if we're print summary in this
case it is a successful create operation
as indicated by this okay in brackets
and right after data set creation there
is now a new directory on your computer
called data like 101 if we now navigate
into this directory with the change
directory come on this is this CD
command and then list the contents of
this data set with the LS command and
then we will see that it's empty that's
not surprising because we haven't put
anything inside of it yet however there
are some hidden directories at work and
those hidden directories are the version
control tools that Datanet does opera
and thanks to these version control
tools this data set has really cool
features for example
a dataset can record everything that is
done inside of it it can version control
all content given to it regardless of
how large this content is and it can
have a complete history that you can
interact with check out previous tapes
referred and so forth even though the
data set is empty and doesn't version
control anything yet this history is
already present and we'll check it out
to just get get you an idea of how it
looks like and get some core concepts
known to you in general this history
exists thanks to the version control
toolkit therefore you can access the
history with any tool that shows you get
history here we stay basic and simply
use the built-in get tool tip lock tip
command like a clock but if you have
other tools that you find visually more
pleasing then go ahead and use them you
can visualize the history with whatever
tool when running gate lock it will show
you the history of the data set as did
commits these good commits are shown in
a certain sequence the most recent
commit is always at the top the commits
are created every time that you save a
change and they have particular
information in them one important piece
is this 40 character string this is a
so-called commit hash or sha sum or
checksum and it's a string that can
uniquely identify any given commit in
your data set you can also see that each
commit has an author and a date and the
time of the change recorded and what you
can finally see is that there's a short
message attached to each commit we
prefer to this message as a commit
message and in general it's a short and
informative summary of what was done in
a particular change usually you will
need to provide such commit messages and
they are useful for you and others to
easily know what was done in human
readable
human-readable way the two commits that
are currently in your data set have
commit messages that were created by
data that though because those two
commits associated with the creation and
the configuration of the data set the
reason that this history is accessible
with git tools is that a data set is get
repository it just has some more
features than I get repository and you
will get to know them soon if you are
get user therefore you can use any git
command of your choice in this data set
and it will just work out of the box I
cannot get user you can still use any
good command but you can also use one of
the data that commands that I'm going to
show you now because this data set is
really quite boring still let's put some
contents inside in version control them
this first part of the demonstration
will show you the general local version
control workflows that you can do with
data that on any type of data because
this narrative contains educational
class let's put a few books such as the
readings that you would usually get any
college cars inside of the data set for
this I'm downloading a couple of books
and put them into my data set I'll start
to be eaten totally by creating a books
directory with the mkdir command I'm
just to have a place for those books to
live in and afterwards I will download
two books from the internet here I'm
doing this with the command line tool W
get it's just convenient for me to do
all of this in the command line even
though the commands a bit lengthy and
intimidating it's just a download if you
want to you can of course just go to the
webpage that these books are hosted on
click on the download button and save
them in this directory after all your
data set just looks like any regular
directory on your computer and you can
just save a PDF in whatever way you
would usually save opinions into this
the books that I'm downloading here are
free and open source in general I can
recommend them
they are on the link Linux command line
and on Python programming and now that
I've downloaded them I can see how my
directory structure looks like by
running the tree command that shows me
the file hierarchy in my directory or my
data set here I can see that there are
the two books that I've downloaded as
PDFs in the Box directory the question
is how does the version control software
that is now working in this directory
behave know that there is content inside
and for this I'm simply going to ask the
data set what its current status and for
this I'm going to use the data led
status command the data LED status
command is a very helpful command that
you should use very often it reports on
the current state of your dataset any
Content that is new or changed will be
highlighted and if nothing has changed
the data LED status will pod will report
on something that is called a clean data
set State and just as a heads up the
clean data set State is the thing that
you should strive for in your work
routines always make sure that you
commit the changes that you have or save
the changes that you have and have a
clean data set all right now this output
of data LED status shows you that the
directory with the new PDF files is
unwrapped and this means that is it that
it is yet unknown to any of the version
controls of them so as a first take home
message this shows you that you need to
explicitly give any content to data led
to have it version controlled it's not
enough to simply add it to a data set
how can we instruct data led to version
control these contents we save them with
the data let's save command this is the
first time that we're using this command
and this is the first time that you need
to specify a commit message yourself so
what we're doing is state let's say and
then the - MRP - which we can attach a
concise summary of what we have
downloaded for example in this case I'm
just describing the books that I've done
afterwards save reports that it has
added those books to the dataset and
data let now knows about the books
directory and the two pdfs inside of it
if I use git lock - and one I can take a
look at the most recent commit in my
history and I had a the information the
way that this information is displayed
here is again something that one needs
to get used to if if you're not used to
see in get histories but it's quite you
can get used to it quite fast in any
case thanks to the commit message we
know exactly what has been done by whom
and also when now this was already
really easy just to say so you already
know how to version control content with
dated let's work on some best practices
just because this was so easy you might
have noticed that the data let's save
command that we just ran saved all of
the untracked changes that were present
in the data and this is the default what
it lets save data let's save if you
don't specify anything else
we'll say if all of the untracked
modifications are unsaved modifications
in your data set and that's behavior
that sometimes inconvenient one great
advantage of the datasets history is
that it allows you to of that changes
that you're not happy with but this is
only easily possible if the unit's
single commits so if one save commit
several unrelated files or changes then
those are hard to disentangle if you
ever want to revert some of those
changes but if you provide atomic
changes that are one meaningful unit
that can be reverted without affecting
any other change in your dataset then
you got to go so how can you do this one
way is to specify precisely which files
you want to add and this can be done by
simply append
path to the data let's save command we
can show you how this is done by simply
downloading another book first again we
downloaded then check the state of the
data set with the data let's status
command and then we'll save it so there
to let status shows that it's an
untracked file as expected and if I now
want to demonstrate precisely how to
specify this exact file to be saved then
it's a title 8 safe and informative
commit message and a path to this new
file awesome
before we move on to the next
demonstrations let's take a look at
files that are frequently modified for
example code or text to try this or to
show it you I will create a file and
modified in the context of an
educational class I will create a file
which collects notes on the educational
car state alert 101 so I'm just creating
a file where I frequently write notes
about the data like commands I'm
learning into the way I'm writing these
nodes is a bit convoluted because I
again want to do everything inside of
the terminal and this is why I'm using
here Docs this is a form of UNIX
redirection to paste text into a file so
the first note that I'm writing is just
this middle of the line I'm executing so
it's one can create a new data set with
data and create paths the dataset is
created empty and executing this line
will write this to a new file notes 3060
you can also just
open up any editor of your choice and
then just write the notes in any way
that you would usually write notes or
text now a date let's date as well as
expected report this file as being
interact and we can again save it with
editor let's save command and to helpful
commit message because this file is the
only change that's present in the data
set I don't even need to provide a path
let's now add another node to modify
this file that is already
again I'm doing this year with a hero
the next state let status report does
not report this file to be untracked but
because it differs now from the state
that it was saved under it is reported
to be modified and how can I save and
you modified file again with data that's
safe if I take a look at the history of
this file now again with good luck then
the history neatly summarizes all of the
changes that we have done this means
that take it together local version
control is really easy with data that it
requires a data set and afterwards all
of the modifications that you do to this
data set can be saved regardless of the
size or type using data let's say if you
save only meaningful units of change and
attach up for commit messages then it
will be easy for you to create a data
set history that you and your future
self and others can understand right
away and that you can also interact with
well cool
so to summarize everything that has
happened so far in this train track
here's a short overview data like create
creates an empty data set there are
useful configuration options you've seen
text yet there were also vo de that
apply suitable defaults to your data set
and he can read up on all of the details
of them in the data lat handbook data
set has a history and this history is
used to track files and the
modifications done to them you can
explore it with any tool that is able to
explore good luck my personal favorite
for example is tick TIG and that gives a
really nice beautiful visually pleasing
summary data let's say records the data
set of file states to the history of
your data set and if you had had a
concise commit message then your future
self and others will thank you for this
human readable information that makes
your data set history understandable
data led status is a command that you
will frequently run because it is
a command that the pods on the state of
the dataset and just to reiterate a keen
dataset status is good practice so
always try to have all of your changes
saved at one point cool
so just by using version control you can
already improve your work great you will
work more cleanly you'll have less
cluttered directories and you also have
the safe feeling that comes from the
certainty that no changes that have
added have been edit at one point a
dataset can never be lost that's quite
nice alright let's get to the next topic
in this demonstration consuming datasets
there are many awesome datasets out
there that you can install on your
computer for example we have public
datasets with hundreds of gigabytes of
openly shared no scientific data that
you can use for your analysis all of the
datasets on open euro for example are
available as data loaded and I can show
you now how to install edited dataset
the educational class doesn't know
download data set from open Errol but
here we're installing another public
data set that is a podcast series that
is called the long now serious and the
long now seminal sorry
first I again will create a subdirectory
in my data set for this to keep
everything nice and orderly yeah I'll
call it recordings afterwards I install
the datasets that I'm interested in this
can generally be a path or it can be a
URL and if you check out the data let
handbook then you can find many more
sources that you can install datasets
from and in this case the data set lives
on github so in order to get it
I will provide its URL to the data like
chrome command importantly I'm also
attaching a path at the end of the data
a clone command that points to the
directory where I want to install this
dataset in that's the
I've just created and also importantly
I'm installing this data set as what is
called a sub data set of data that 101
in other words I will nest the two data
sets dated at 101 and the long no data
set into each other then I have the
super data set and a sub data set and
this is done by providing a dash dash
data set flag and a path to the root in
this case it's just a dot to the top
level data set
here's how this sub data set looks like
right after I cloned it there are new
directories in my data at 101 data set
and if I never get into these new
directories and then list the contents
of one of it then there are hundreds of
mp3 files and given the amount of files
that we're seeing here it is really
quite surprising how fast the
installation of the data set was I
personally would expect that it should
take much longer to download a directory
with that many files but here's the
crucial and incredibly handy feature of
data collect data sets at this point
right after cloning the data set only
contains small files for example the
readme files and but we simplify
referred to as fire availability
metadata all of these mp3 files that you
can see in here don't have any falcon
ticket think of them as only being file
names but not having content so if I
would try to play one of the recordings
then this would fit here I'm trying to
open it up with the VLC player and you
can see that the portal complains that
it just can't find the file that I want
to open up this is a way to get used to
but incredibly handy
this makes data set really lightweight
and fast to install
because I can still explore the
hierarchy of the files in this data set
I can check what is available so let's
take a look at the size of this
directory I'm using the yo command - so
show the disk usage and this data set
right after installation it's tiny
because I've told you my content is not
available yet only small files but I can
also find out how latch the data set
would be if I would get all of the file
contents and for this I can use data
that status with the - - and expec so in
total it appears that in this data set
would be more than 15 gigabytes of mp3
files and because I've installed this
data set I now have access to these
files should I want to file retrieval
that means getting the file contents
actually down to my computer is done
with the data let get command this
command can retrieve individual or
groups of files directories sub datasets
whatever you specify and then download
their contents I will do it for one
podcast title and you can see how it
summarizes the operation in the end with
a okay to indicate that successful
retrieval happened afterwards I can
actually open up the file content and it
is now locally available so I can now
listen to my podcasts and if that would
be an open raw data set I can analyze
the MER imaging data I have just
downloaded if we retrieve more files
including one that was already retrieved
so I'm retrieving three files in total
but one of them already has the content
locally available and you can see that
it is not really treating the already
existing content it will summarize this
file to be not needed and the other ones
content is retrieved cool
now imagine that this data set wasn't
about podcasts
for example the human connectome product
we make the HCP data available as a data
set that you can install from github
just as you have with this podcast
depository that makes it very easily
accessible when you clone this data set
then in its entirety or with all of
subject sets that the HCP data said that
is on github has it will have 15 million
files and 80 terabytes of data and
that's a lot to start on a single
computer however if you take into
account the features that data let
datasets have right after cloning you
realize that even though you have access
to all of the 80 terabytes of HCP data
the data set that you have downloaded
would be incredibly tiny and you can
download only those files that you are
currently needing because probably your
analyses of the HCP data will not
require any two types of files or all of
the 15 million files but maybe just a
subset of cool so this is already a disk
space saving approach to things by still
having access to all of the data and
only retrieving that data that you
currently need theory you can have more
data on your computer than your hard
drive has available disk space that
sounds cool doesn't it and we can take
this further because now imagine that
you have run an analysis on the HCP data
so in theory only your results are what
is important
you can always redownload the HCP data
but your results are unique and you
should save them let's take a look at
this in our narrative so let's say that
you've listened to a podcast and as you
don't need the content anymore then you
can use the command data let drop two
rooms
in its place after you've dropped the
content there will still be the file
name so to say but no content just as it
was right after you clone this dataset
and because data let knows where to get
the data from it can just be retrieved
so if I run day can I get again then I
have downloaded it again that's that's
quite handy note though that dropping
entry retrieving data does only work for
data where they tell it knows the origin
so you can drop data from install data
sets for example and data that you have
it had origin provenance too but you
shouldn't attempt to drop data that
you've just added to your data set
because this operation would permanently
remove the content from the data set and
data that yet will not know where to
retrieve those files bomb so don't drop
the PDFs that you have added to this
data set should you attempt to do this
data that will warn you though
do not let you proceed without forcing
cool so at this point you have the means
to version control arbitrary large
contents and you can consume existing
datasets and you can save disk space by
getting a dropping data on do it one
other aspect that is useful to
understand is data set mystic let's take
a look into the history of this long now
sub dataset we can see that it has
preserved its history completely there
is no notion about PDFs or notes that we
created in the data at 101 dataset but
here we can see the complete evolution
of this data set I can find out who
created it and what was done to it this
means that this data set has kept all of
its problems how does the addition of
the sublight aside look like in the
table level data set if we cried the
data led 101 history then there also
will know of the commits that
we have to steam nakum it's about 93
files any of the other commits and
instead we can see that this up that the
super dataset recorded the long known
data set as a sub dataset this means
that it recorded where the status ed
came from here it is it's good for pure
up and what version it is they do me a
favor and memorize this commits awesome
that is referred to a sub-project commit
here for shortening at least to start
the first few characters of it I'll
navigate into the slap dataset again and
here we notice that the char some that
we have memorized is the char some of
the most recent committing the sub
dataset so what the super dataset we
called it is the most recent version and
thus by nesting datasets you have a way
of linking a dataset in a precise
version to another dataset let's quickly
summarize everything we have seen on
dataset consumption and investing you
can install a dataset using data let
alone either from a path or URL or if
you read the handbook also from range of
other sources in this example we have
seen a dataset being installed as a sub
dataset inside of an existing data set
pass pass NB - - data set option and a
path to the root of the top level
dataset but you can also install data
sets on their own outside of existing
data sets by just not using the - - data
set option right after the installation
of data set it is really lightweight
there are only small files and metadata
about final availability present and you
can retrieve any data that is not yet
present using the data that get command
whenever you need it if data doesn't
need to be present locally anymore then
you can drop it using the data to drop
command to save disk space and finally
data sets preserve the history thus I
can find out things like what was done
to it it said how did a file came to be
or who did work on this
and much more and when nesting data sets
the top level data set on super data set
records the version that this sub
dataset is in but now what makes this
last point so special it's sometimes a
bit hard to grasp if you have simplified
examples in principle it allows to join
independent components for say a study
let me give you a concrete example of
this to make it a bit more clear for
this I'll briefly abandon the handle
narrative and instead I'm showing you a
paper that I have ready
thanks to Datanet this paper is
completely and automatically
reproducible and I'm able to share code
data manuscript and code execution of
makita so if you want to check out the
github repository in this link and try
it out yourself I'll read all about the
details on creating such a reproducible
paper in a dedicated use case in the
data lat handle this repository is a
data set that I published github
the top level data set contains the
natty sources for the menus group and
the code that computes the results I
report in my paper the data that also
contains sub data sets that contain the
various data that this code is executed
on and I said everything up in a way
that figures and results can be computed
locally and are directly embedded into
the manuscript after the computations
have ran with such a repository I can
not only share my coded data but
everyone can simply recompute every
result of my paper and validated claims
and all of that openly available on it
that's quite neat so what happened while
I wrote this paper was that data for my
computations changed because the mistake
was fixed with data let though I was
able to simply update the data to its
fixed state and record which version of
the data my computations are based let
me show you this in a bit more detail
this way I can also show you how cloning
nested datasets feels like so today that
you dive into this I cloned this data
set from get up afterwards I can check
out the sub datasets of the top level
data set I can do this with the command
data led sub data sets this lists all of
the available subject sets off the
current data set one of these sub data
set is called Vimanas and that's a data
set that contains the source code for a
Python package Kalamata knife used in
eye-tracking analyses that this paper is
about now after cloning a data set it's
up datasets will be known but just as
content is not yet retrieved for files
and the datasets supply the sets of data
sets are not yet installed so if I
navigate into an uninstalled sub data
set it will appear like an empty
directory you can see that if I list the
contents there's nothing in order to
install a sub data set I again used it
let get this command doesn't only a
retrieve file content but it also
installs sub data sets so if you want to
be really lazy you can just run data
that get - - recursive and then - and in
the root of a data set to install all of
the available subtitle sets down the
hierarchy of data sets the - an option
prevents data from being downloaded it
is short for - - no data the recursive
option recursive into the Araki of all
of the data sets and here I'm limiting
how deep I actually want to install
datasets because this data is really
quite nested um okay afterwards I can
again inquiry which sub data sets are
available now in the modern of sub data
set and here I can see about the evening
more sub data sets in this data set here
there are sub data sets contain data
that is used
for testing and validating soft
performance and at this point you really
might think of seeing supply deserts
because what's the point
yes what is very useful is that sub
datasets modularize my paper project and
keeping things modular can make project
components more reusable and the overall
project less cluttered and mongst and
bomb and by nesting the modular
components I can flexibly link
everything that I need for a given
project while each component preserves
all of its history in provenance for
example the top level data set contain
code and manuscript for my paper this is
one standalone component that is useful
another sub dataset contains the data
that I'm running the code from the
superlicious at all this data can be
used in more than a single paper though
I'm saying keeping this as a standalone
data set and just link it in a precise
version to my code in manuscript this
way I can use the data dataset easily
for all kinds of analysis simply by
installing it into the data set that I
currently develop my coding magnif sub
dataset contains the Python package that
the papers about and this on its own is
again a nice standalone thing and um the
validation data that the software uses
is again also used in several contexts
and there's also standalone datasets now
because all of these datasets are linked
as a nested hierarchy of datasets if I
share my paper with you you can go from
the finished paper back to the raw data
that I base my analyses on and get a
complete overview of what I have done
should I decide to share all of that and
this aids the disability and
transparency of science greatly i have
elaborate on the principles behind this
a bit more later but let me first show
you how in general important it is to
version data and clean precise dataset
versions
one of the validation data subject
assets car came from another lab that
shed the data and after I was almost
finished with everything
writing the discussion I came across a
paper that reported a mistake and this
chat dataset I checked and the mistake
was still present in the data that I was
using so if you go into the history of
this specific sub dataset and check it
out then you can see that at one point I
contributed a fix that changed the data
the data is now fixed but this
nevertheless means that there is a
difference in the data that existed in
2018 and the data that existed in 2019
and changed data is a very dangerous
thing to the reproducibility of
sightings because changed data usually
also means changed results but because
everything here was linked as data
datasets
I was simply able to update the data to
its most recent state and then rerun all
of my computations automatically embed
all of my results automatically and have
correct results based on the fixed data
and if I wanted to I could even go and
check for example how robust my results
are against mistakes like that by
resetting this data set to a previous
state and then rewriting everything
again
so having data let version data is from
my personal experience a really useful
thing to have and a great protection
against unknown changes in data that can
make that potentially irreproducible if
you're not aware that your data changes
cool
this has hopefully giving you a first
idea on why nesting data sets is useful
my version controlling data is important
for the reproducibility of analyses and
how complex but yet surprisingly
understandable data the data set can be
combined
and to publish reproducible research
objects and that already brings us to
the next part of this demonstration
reducible analysis not only can i
version control data and consume data
with the data let I can also create
datasets with data analyses in a way
that my future self and others can
easily and automatically reproduce and
recompute what was done and in order to
do this I actually don't need to do much
I need to comply to some basic
organizational principles for data sets
and I need to tell that led to record
how analyses are conducted the results
of such a fraud will be a data set that
has a provenance record on how results
of an analysis came into existence and
it also has the ability to automatically
re-execute an analysis and I'm going to
show you how this is done but first let
me give you a wrap-up of these basic
organizational principles I talked about
if you're interested in the details of
them then you can read up on them in the
day if you let handbook in the chapter
on Yoda principles you will also
recognize them from the setup of the
reducible paper repository that I have
just shown you so first of all you
should make sure that your data set is
clean and modular um the analysis code
should be developed in the top level
data set and the input data for the
analysis should be installed in its
precise version as a subject set by some
so you have the code component and you
have the input component separate yet
linked as data sets next you shouldn't
touch the raw date when you compute
results for a data analysis don't save
them into the input data set instead
keep the sub dataset clean and untouched
and collect the out
foods in the top level data set this
makes it easier to understand your
directory structure so if you include
outputs and inputs into the same
directory it will be hard for others and
your future self to understand which is
input which is output but importantly
adding the outputs to the data set that
you computed you or develop your code in
and ran your code and will also help you
to link your results to the code and the
computation further keep super datasets
self-contained write scripts third
reference sub datasets are files with
relative paths instead of absolute paths
this way you can share your data set and
the scripts will run successfully on
other computers that have any different
underlying file structure if they only
reference files of sub datasets as
relative paths and finally you should
record as much provenance as you can so
you should link data sets by installing
them and sub data sets you should record
the execution of commands to track which
scripts produced which output or even
attach a software environment to the
execution record and if you adhere to
these principles then you can create
data analyses that can be automatically
and even computationally reproducible
I'll show you the basics of this in a
small data analysis project in which I
will run a simple classification
analysis on some data set this is a try
example and it's simplified to make my
life easy and to not have you bother
with understanding the computation that
the principles that I'm showing you can
be applied to a data set to a data
analysis of any complexity so here what
I'm doing I'll take this very known iris
dataset and run a simple K nearest
neighbors classifications on it
important
in this analysis I will make sure that I
not only record how I run the
computation but I will also make the
computation automatically divisible but
first let me set up my analysis for this
I create a new dataset here I use a
different configuration procedure that
is called Yoda this configuration sets
up a helpful structure for my data set
with a code directory and some readme
files and it applies helpful
configurations next I will proceed by
installing my input data as a sub data
set to keep everything nice and modular
for this I created a data set with a CSV
file that contains the iris data and I
published it to Peter here
I'm installing it into a directory that
I call input the last thing I need is
code to run on the data and produce
results for this I have posted a K
nearest neighbors classification
analysis scripted I'm currently printing
to the screen and then save into a
script hi fire in my code directory this
script is written in Python and it uses
the package pandas to load the aresty to
load the iris data the package Seabourn
to plot the data and then save a figure
as a result and the package ask Halon to
perform a K nearest neighbor
classification and save those results
I have also as you can see included a
later that get command in this script
just for you to see how a data layer can
be used in Python scripts and what you
should note here is that all of the
paths that I'm using in this script
relative and absolute so they only point
into for example the sub dataset or to
the root of the super dataset I have
copied the script into the code
directory and running
status tells me that it is
unsurprisingly and tracked so let me
quickly save it to the history of the
data settle with a data led safe command
we can also pretend that this script is
really complex and I have spent weeks
working on it with plenty of data let
saves in between and if I want to I can
also identify this finished state of my
analysis script with a tag and
identifier I can attach this with the -
- version take option off the data let's
save command now with my input data
installed and with my code script set up
I can in principle now run Python
interpreter code script PI to execute
the script and produce results but if
this great this analysis would be more
complex and analysis of one of many then
it will be bloody difficult to associate
the outputs with the script that was run
with the data that it was run on after
let's say two days it's very hard to
remember such things and the challenge
that data that helps me to accomplish is
to run the script in a way that links
the script to the results it produces
and also to the data that it was
computed from I can do this with a
specific command that is called data LED
run I visualize it here and I walk you
through the figuring a bit later that
run in principle is a command that
captures the execution of any command
the execution of the script the
execution of the terminal command and
then links at the command that was run
to the output that was produced so it
takes the data set state before running
the command then runs the command
checks what changed in the data said and
saves all of that linking it to the
command that was run so I'm running
script I can link the outputs that are
produced by the script to the script and
the command I called it with in
principle this is really simple so let's
start first of all we need to have a
clean data set afterwards I'll compose
my data let one command I give the
command that I would execute in this
case Python code script pipe two dated
lead one and date that will take this
command run it and save all of the
changes in the data set that this leads
to under the commit message that I have
specified with you - and I'm marching
right at the side of this command so
this already associate the script with
the results that will be produced from
it but the command can even be more
helpful it can also help to retrieve the
data that is necessary so I can specify
the input data in the command and data
let will get the data beforehand because
you can though I have installed this
update I said I haven't retrieved the
data that is inside of it here in this
particular command I also specify the
output of the command in principle this
is not always necessary and to
understand fully what this does please
read chapters 2 and 3 of the Datanet
handbook but in general specifying these
outputs will allow me in a couple of
minutes to rerun the command and let me
update outdated results now if I run
this data let creates any committed
mystery this commit has the commit
message that I gave to this commit as a
human-readable summary of what was done
but this commit also contains the
produced output so it's already linked
and importantly the commit has a
machine-readable record that contained
information on the input data the
results and the command that was one to
create this result this machine readable
record is particularly helpful so it's
not the most readable thing but it's not
meant for human consumption it's meant
for machine consumption because now I
can instruct data led to rerun this
command so that I don't have to memorize
what I had done and the people that I
share my data sets with don't need to
ask me how a particular result was
produced they can simply let data let
tell them and reacts acute in a command
that was ran through data led run is
done with the data read rerun command
for this demonstration I have prepared
an analysis data set and published it to
get her just the same analysis data set
that I have created with you right now
and now let me simply clone this
repository and then use the data LED
rerun command to rerun the run command
that I have used so imagine that I'm a
collaborator of myself I received this
data set I want to find out what was
done and I'm simply refunding the exact
computation this I could use something
like a tag but here I'm just checking
the checksum of the run commit and put
it into the data let rerun command data
LED will then read the machinery to a
record that is attached to this commit
identified by this checksum and then
recompute the exact same thing because I
have specified everything that was
necessary the inputs and the outputs
they should add will be able to retrieve
the data and update the outputs for
example should the data change and so
forth and now I have reproduced the
results
that I computed here cool so this allows
others to very easily rerun my
computations but honestly it also spells
me the needs to remember how I executed
my script I have scripts I have many
command arguments and sometimes I really
can't remember how to execute them and
if I execute them with data later on I
can simply rerun them and have data
let's take care of this memory task for
me and that's really helpful what I
could also do now is I could alter my
script a bit for example change the
color scheme of the figure that I have
created and then simply rerun the
command again to update the figure to a
new color scheme what is also useful in
this data set is that I can simply ask a
result where it came from and this can
be as simple as just running the get
lock of command on this result and
afterwards the get history of this
command will tell me all of the commits
that are associated with it
so with this very simple information I
can find out which script produced this
result on which data I can even find out
which version and who did this and when
this was done very useful if I ever want
to blame someone for computation for
example myself cool but let's now take
what the disability one step further you
can let's say that I share this data set
with you and I want you to recompute my
results if you however don't use Python
regularly and don't have the required
PI's and packages available running the
script in recomputing the results will
naturally fail because you don't have
the software available in order to be
computationally reproducible I also
should attach the software that is
necessary for a computation to this
execution record and this is
particularly helpful if you're using
software where
different versions of it produce
slightly changing results if it software
it's just a pain to download so if you
want to spare others the pain of setting
up their software environments just so
that they can recompute and validate
your results do them a favor and it had
software environments to your
computation and the way I can do this is
with a data light extension data LED has
several extensions that come with
special functionality and add data led
commands to the commands that day to let
car already has in this case the day
that extension is called data LED
contains you can install any day to that
extension with the Python package drop
it so in order to install this and this
extension I can simply run Pitman's darn
data led containers this extension is
really helpful because it allows me to
attach software containers such as
singularity on top of containers to my
data set and then it will execute the
commands that I'm running inside of
these containers with this I can not
only share my code my code execution and
my data but also the software that
everything runs him and here's how it
works first I had had a software
container to my data set using the data
LED containers at command this command
takes the name of the container here I
call it software and a URL or a path to
where this container can be found with
the - - URL black you can have a
container locally and then point with a
path to it as my case here point to a
URL on singularity hub also - cop and
what this command does is it records the
software in the data set so you can see
that the Catena is currently being
downloaded and then saved into my data
set
afterwards I can rerun my analysis in
the software container using the data
containers run command this containers
run command works just as the run
command before I only need to
additionally specify the container name
so if you now were to rerun such an
analysis that was ran with data that
containers run data that would not only
retrieve the input data but it would
also retrieve the software container and
then execute the command with the code
that you provided on the data that is
recorded in the execution inside of this
container and thus you can make sure
that your analysis is as reproduce above
as you can potentially make it cool so
to summarize this last demonstration
data layer contains functionality to
create reproducible analyses by linking
data code code execution and software to
the results that are produced this helps
others to understand and recreate your
analysis but it will also be helpful for
yourself to produce your own results and
keep track of what you have done I hope
that this demonstration gave you some
interesting glimpses into the basics of
data led and what is possible with it
there is a lot that I didn't explain yet
and there is much more that you can use
data led form all of this is detailed in
the data led handbook though so if my
demonstration intrigued you and you're
going to find out more then go ahead and
read the data lat handbook check out
this the pieces that you need and learn
how to do the project that you envision
you can as a start also for example
clone publicly available data sets such
as the ones from over neural to just
explore data sets a bit more and explore
the looks in fuse of them if anyone is
still listening at this point thanks a
lot for your attention
our finish wish with acknowledgments and
with many thanks to the creators and
contributors of date alert and the
little handbook if you have questions
then reach out for example in the data
led riot channel or on github data light
are of the date alert handbook and if
you want to you can contribute to the
development of the data let handbook for
example with your own use case are by
simply making the book more accessible I
understand I appreciate everyone know
who reaches out I hope that I will be
able to meet you in person tell you more
about data LED face to face and general
that we all get safely through this
pandemic I wish you happy for the train
track and if I'm here in this train
track session then bombard me with
questions about Datanet bye from my side
and see you in the chat